---
layout: page
title: Work
permalink: /work/
---

I am a Software Engineer by profession.  My expertise is in C++, Python, shell
scripting, test automation, and (Unix) operating systems.  I am recognized for
writing clean code and for steadily delivering results with attention to the
finest detail.  I enjoy working on infrastructure-level software and my motto is
simple: *production software can be beautiful*; you just need to hold it to the
same high standards as you hold user-facing products.  The payoffs of a clean
infrastructure are invaluable.

I am currently *employed by Google Inc. as a Software Engineer* (previously as
a Site Reliabiliity Engineer) and I am based in the New York City office.
Since 2009, I have worked for various teams including:

* **[Blaze / Bazel](http://bazel.io/) (SWE, 2016Q1 to present)**: Google's build
  system.  Blaze is the internal version and Bazel is the open source release.

* **[Persistent Disk](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks/persistent-disks)
  (SRE, 2013Q4 to 2015Q4)**: A fundamental component of
  Google Compute Engine offering durable and high-performance block
  devices for the virtual machines that you run.  The SRE team
  supporting this product was jointly started by a coworker and I.

* **[Colossus](http://static.googleusercontent.com/external_content/untrusted_dlcp/research.google.reverse-proxy.org/en/us/university/relations/facultysummit2010/storage_architecture_and_challenges.pdf)
  (SRE, 2010Q1 to 2013Q3)**: The successor to the Google File System
  (GFS), Colossus is the high-availability, cluster-level file system
  that powers the majority of Google.

* **[GFS](http://research.google.com/archive/gfs.html)
  (SRE, 2009Q2 to 2011Q2)**: The original cluster-level file system
  developed at Google focused on batch-processing of massive data
  sets.

Aside from having worked on these teams, I also have extensive experience with
Google's infrastructure and, in particular, with
*[Borg](http://research.google.com/pubs/pub43438.html): Google's large-scale
cluster management software*.  After having used Borg for years I dislike
fiddling with individual machines with passion&mdash;although, of course, [I
still do that when
necessary](http://julipedia.meroh.net/2013/12/introducing-freebsd-test-suite.html).
Thankfully, [Kubernetes](http://kubernetes.io/) is bringing Borg to the world in
nicer packaging.

You can read [Six years at
Google](https://medium.com/@jmmv/six-years-at-google-8b06563fab08) for more
details on what my work entails and see my [LinkedIn
profile](https://www.linkedin.com/in/juliomerino) for further information on my
education and work history.

## Consulting

Am I available for hire and/or long-term freelance work?  Maybe.  [Ask me.  Sell
me your project.](/about)

## Education

I have a 5-year long **Undergraduate Degree in Computer Science** and a
**Master's Degree in Computer Architecture, Networks and Systems**, both by the
[Universitat Polit&egrave;cnica de Catalunya](http://www.upc.edu/) in Barcelona,
Spain.  I was enrolled in a Ph.D. program on Operating Systems for a few months
until I later got hired by Google in 2009.  My research topic was on
heterogeneous systems and their support in operating systems, mostly focusing on
the [Cell processor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cell_(microprocessor)) at the
time.
