---
title: "Task tracking and the Bullet Journal"
date: 2014-11-20 09:13:00 -0500
categories:
  - "featured"
  - "productivity"
julipedia: 2014/11/task-tracking-and-bullet-journal.html
---
iGTD, Things, Org mode, OmniFocus, Google Tasks, Trello, Google Keep...
All of them. All of them I have tried over the last few years and all of
them have failed me in some way &mdash; or, rather, I have failed to adjust to
their idiosyncrasies. Part of it is because the overwhelming feeling
that builds up after days of continuous use due to how easy it is to end
up with never-ending piles of open tasks.

In other words: even after making the effort to adjust to these systems,
none of them have really worked for me. The one that kept me on track
for the longest was [Org mode](http://orgmode.org/), topping at three
months of continuous use plus some more months of occasional use, which
is *nothing* for a system that is supposed to help you plan your day,
week, month, year and, well, life.

But about nine months ago, I made a discovery. I stumbled upon the
[Bullet Journal](http://www.bulletjournal.com/): a simple yet effective
system to track tasks using traditional pen and paper. After watching
the introductory video and giving the system a test drive for a week on
an old notebook, I set out to invest a few extra dollars into a nicer
journal:

<img src="/images/2014-11-20-P1130832.jpg" class="block" />

Nice notebooks are "pricey," and that's why I bought one: the point of
the exercise was to trick myself into using the shiny new purchase...
and the trick worked for long enough to hook me into the system. Not
surprisingly though: previous experiments of mine at tracking tasks with
a simple and unstructured sheet of paper resulted in productivity boosts
and a feeling of accomplishment that I did not get otherwise.

# What is the Bullet Journal?

The *Bullet Journal* is an extremely simple notebook-based task-tracking
system designed by Ryder Carroll. At its core is something called *Rapid
Logging*, a set of trivial rules to record, in a chronological manner,
tasks, notes, and events. The system adds some more structure to this by
dividing the chronological list of items into days or topics, and by
outlining a monthly spread and task management workflow.

It is interesting to see how such simple concepts can work so well in
practice and, especially, how popular this system has become over the
last couple of years. Just look at [the Google+ community behind this
methodology](https://plus.google.com/communities/109117749342179166498)
and the success of [Ryder's Kickstarter
project](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1562027630/bullet-journal-journaling-at-the-speed-of-life)
to see what I mean.

# Monthly review: the best part of it

The monthly review is the part of the Bullet Journal system that I enjoy
the most and the part that truly makes me feel the usefulness of the
system. 9 months and 100 pages in and I can reflect and see that this
system has made a positive difference in my work.

<img src="/images/2014-11-20-P1130825.jpg" class="float-left" />

If you have ever read David Allen's [Getting Things
Done](http://gettingthingsdone.com/), you know that regular reviews are
essential to ensure that the contents of your system are up-to-date and
remain relevant. While it is easy (for me) to overlook this important
thinking time with a computerized system, it is pretty much impossible
to do so with a notebook system because of its *linearity*: when the
next month arrives, the preparation of the new monthly spread triggers
the review of the previous month.

That's, precisely, why I like it. According to the Bullet Journal
guidelines, you should consolidate all of your pending tasks from the
last month into a "carryover section" in the current month. Because the
system is chronological and paper based, the implication is that this
consolidation involves *manually copying tasks from previous pages into
the new month*. Sounds burdensome? *Exactly*, and that's why this works
so well: having to copy a task over will push you to decide whether the
task is still relevant, whether the effort to do it at that point is
lower than copying the task, or whether the task can be moved to the
calendar because it now has a deterministic start/due date.

This consolidation step into a new monthly spread is also critical in
keeping your journal manageable. Because all tasks are consolidated into
a new month, you are left with a reduced set of pages to go through to
locate open tasks. In my case, I only use about 10&ndash;15 pages per month,
which means that this is the amount of pages I have to review on a daily
or weekly basis to see where my projects are at.

# My own tweaks: habits and weekly planning

Another great aspect of the Bullet Journal&mdash;or really, any journal&mdash;is
that it is free form: if you don't like the rules, just come up with
your own. To that extent, there are plenty of ideas online in places
such as the aforementioned Google+ community, a multitude of blog posts,
and at some point the new web-based portal that Ryder is working on.

Personally, I have adopted two tweaks inspired by what other people were
doing.

The first is the incorporation of *monthly and weekly goal-setting
sections*. These take the form of lists of coarse-grained tasks
representing goals, and these lists serve as the basis from which to
derive finer-grained tasks when planning the current day. These tasks
representing goals cannot be easily accomplished, but that's by design:
the idea is to use them to distill more specific "next actions" while at
the same time having some kind of status record of your week and month.

<img src="/images/2014-11-20-P1130823.jpg" class="float-right" />

The second is the *tracking of habits*. In my monthly spread, I reserve
the right page to track a bunch of habits I want to build. I do so by
matching up various columns to the calendar days and then just crossing
out the tasks on the days when they are done. These include things like
reading, cooking, shaving, or commuting by bike.

So far, I have only gotten so-so results from these two tweaks.
Especially, the upfront planning that is necessary to make goal-setting
work is a habit in itself that needs to be built, but an important one
as plenty of productivity books will teach you. (See
[Decide](http://www.amazon.com/Decide-Smarter-Reduce-Stress-Example/dp/1118554388)
by Steve McClatchy or [The One
Thing](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00C1BHQXK) by Gary Keller.)
When I spend time planning ahead, the following days are much more
productive; however, without the ingrained habit, it very easy to get
side-tracked and end up not doing any such planning.

# The major drawback: future planning

The one thing I haven't really yet figured out is managing long-term
planning with the Bullet Journal methodology.

An idea that comes to mind involves keeping individual pages to jot down
project milestones and week-to-week expectations, but I'm not sure that
would be easy to deal with: somehow I personally need the ability to
visualize the timeline of the project on a calendar with all the time
impediments that may exist. In this regard, I have been happy at work by
depicting the available time as a collection of weeks and drafting the
expected status of each project on those future weeks.

Also, the calendar spread proposed by the Bullet Journal is of limited
value to me. I am very used to the online Google Calendar for timed
appointments, and I am now abusing it to also mark tasks that need to be
started at some point in the far future. For example, I now trust the
Calendar system to remind me, five years from now, to renew my passport.

Again, the system is so free form that you can play with your own ideas
on how to manage your tasks. Whatever suits best your workflow, go for
it; and if that means combining the journal with an electronic system,
so be it!

# Summing it up

To this day, I am still surprised what a difference pen and paper has
made on my productivity compared to computerized task tracking systems.

Sure, I sometimes miss the ability to access my system anytime,
anywhere. But having a system that is always-on is *useless* if the
system is forgotten. Carrying a notebook around has forced me to think
about what I write in it and to want to look at it later on.

*Give it a try. Do so by visiting [the Bullet Journal
website](http://www.bulletjournal.com/) and [watching the
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GfRf43JTqY4).*
